.\" nat(1) man page
.TH NAT 1 "2026-05-08" "nat" "NAT Research Platform"
.SH NAME
nat \- unified CLI for the NAT quantitative research platform
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nat
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nat
is the single entry point for the NAT quantitative research platform.
It manages real-time data ingestion from Hyperliquid perpetual futures,
feature computation (191 features across 14 categories), cluster analysis,
alpha research, backtesting, ML training, and live deployment.
.PP
Rust handles real-time ingestion and feature computation; Python handles
analysis, backtesting, and ML training.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Core Operations
.TP
.B nat start
Start the ingestor with auto-restart watchdog and dashboard.
.TP
.B nat stop
Stop all running processes (ingestor, dashboard, API).
.TP
.B nat status
Health check \(em shows process status, data stats, and uptime.
.TP
.B nat log
Tail the ingestor log.
.TP
.B nat report
Generate an experiment report from collected data.
.TP
.B nat dashboard
Start the web dashboard.
.TP
.B nat macro
Show daily macro signals (SMA crossovers, regime).
.TP
.B nat help
Print the full command reference with all subcommands.
.SS Alpha Screening
.TP
.B nat screen \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR] [\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Run the alpha feature screener (Step 1).
.TP
.B nat scan \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR] [\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Scalp edge scanner for tail-effect strategy discovery.
.SS Alpha Research Pipeline (Steps 2\-9)
.TP
.B nat alpha combine \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-top\fR \fIN\fR]
Feature combination \(em composite signal from top-N features with correlation dedup (Step 2).
.TP
.B nat alpha size \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-cost\-mult\fR \fIX\fR]
Cost-aware position sizing \(em only trade when E[gain] > 1.5x cost (Step 3).
.TP
.B nat alpha validate \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-n\-folds\fR \fIN\fR]
Walk-forward validation adapter (Step 4).
.TP
.B nat alpha regime \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
Regime conditioning \(em per-regime feature rescreening (Step 5).
.TP
.B nat alpha multi\-freq \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
Multi-frequency integration \(em macro SMA gates + micro sizing (Step 6).
.TP
.B nat alpha portfolio \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Portfolio assembly with risk parity weighting (Step 7).
.TP
.B nat alpha paper \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Paper trading simulation with IC decay monitoring (Step 8).
.TP
.B nat alpha deploy \fR[\fB\-\-status\fR|\fB\-\-check\fR]
Deployment readiness check and kill switch status (Step 9).
.SS Profiling
.TP
.B nat profile scalp \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR] [\fB\-\-top\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB\-\-forward\-test\fR]
Scalping feature profiler \(em IC, hit rate, quintile spreads, cost-adjusted edge.
.SS Cluster Analysis
.TP
.B nat cluster analyze \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
Analyze cluster quality (silhouette, BIC).
.TP
.B nat cluster gmm \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
GMM-based clustering analysis.
.TP
.B nat cluster all
Analyze all symbols.
.TP
.B nat cluster quality
Q3 predictive quality test (Kruskal-Wallis, eta-squared, per-cluster Sharpe).
.TP
.B nat cluster explore \fR[\fB\-\-subset\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-\-cluster\-method\fR \fIMETHOD\fR]
Exploratory clustering (PCA/UMAP/t-SNE) without predefined assumptions.
.TP
.B nat cluster hmm\-fit \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR] [\fB\-\-n\-states\fR \fIN\fR]
Fit Hidden Markov Model on feature data (Baum-Welch).
.SS Validation
.TP
.B nat validate skeptical \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-output\fR \fIDIR\fR]
20+ statistical tests designed to disprove core hypotheses before investment.
.SS Visualization
.TP
.B nat visualize scan
Scanner plots (tail effects, edge distribution).
.TP
.B nat visualize data
Data quality plots.
.TP
.B nat visualize profile
Cluster profiling plots.
.TP
.B nat visualize hierarchy \fR[\fB\-\-vector\fR \fINAME\fR]
Hierarchical profiling plots (Phase 8) \(em PCA, signatures, transitions, drift.
.TP
.B nat visualize all
Generate all visualization types.
.SS Backtesting
.TP
.B nat backtest \fR[\fB\-\-strategy\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
Run strategy backtest.  Available strategies: funding_reversion, scalping, micro.
.TP
.B nat backtest ml \fR[\fB\-\-model\fR \fIPATH\fR]
ML predictions backtest.
.TP
.B nat backtest validate
Walk-forward validation.
.TP
.B nat backtest list
List available strategies.
.SS Model Training
.TP
.B nat model train \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Train baseline ML model.
.TP
.B nat model train\-gmm
Train GMM classifier.
.TP
.B nat model list
List saved models.
.TP
.B nat model score \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR]
Score data with a trained model.
.TP
.B nat model serve
Start model serving API.
.SS Experiment Management
.TP
.B nat experiment list
List experiments.
.TP
.B nat experiment compare
Compare experiments.
.TP
.B nat experiment snapshot \fR[\fB\-\-data\fR \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-name\fR \fINAME\fR]
Create dataset snapshot for reproducibility.
.TP
.B nat experiment workflow
Full ML workflow (train, evaluate, track).
.SS Testing
.TP
.B nat test
Run all Rust unit tests.
.TP
.B nat test verbose
Tests with \-\-nocapture.
.TP
.B nat test hypotheses
Run hypothesis tests (H1\-H5).
.TP
.B nat test validate
Live API validations against Hyperliquid.
.TP
.B nat test integration
Integration tests for profiling pipeline.
.TP
.B nat test backtest
Backtest tests.
.TP
.B nat test cluster
Cluster quality tests.
.SS Build & Dev
.TP
.B nat build
Build release binaries (LTO enabled).
.TP
.B nat build debug
Debug build (faster iteration).
.TP
.B nat build clean
Remove build artifacts.
.TP
.B nat build fmt
Format Rust code.
.TP
.B nat build lint
Run clippy linter.
.SS Data Management
.TP
.B nat data
Show data directory stats (size, file count, date range).
.TP
.B nat data validate
Validate parquet data integrity.
.TP
.B nat data schema
Scan and display parquet schema.
.TP
.B nat data explore
Launch Jupyter for interactive exploration.
.SS Infrastructure
.TP
.B nat run
Run ingestor in foreground.
.TP
.B nat run serve
Ingestor + dashboard.
.TP
.B nat run show
Real-time feature display.
.TP
.B nat pipeline start|resume|stop|status
Automated pipeline state machine (IDLE \(-> BUILDING \(-> INGESTING \(-> ANALYZING \(-> DONE).
.TP
.B nat signal test \fR[\fB\-\-symbol\fR \fISYM\fR]
Signal existence test.
.TP
.B nat eamm run|regime|backtest
EAMM market making strategy.
.TP
.B nat api start|alerts|serve\-all
API server and Telegram alerts.
.TP
.B nat exp start|stop|status|check|analyze
Experiment runner (remote ingestor management).
.TP
.B nat docker build|up|down|logs
Docker operations.
.SH DATA FLOW
.nf
Hyperliquid WebSocket
  \(-> HyperliquidClient (ws/client.rs)
  \(-> MarketState (state/mod.rs)
  \(-> FeatureComputer (features/*.rs) [191 features, 14 categories]
  \(-> ParquetWriter (output/writer.rs)
  \(-> data/features/YYYY-MM-DD/*.parquet (rotated hourly)
.fi
.PP
Each symbol (BTC, ETH, SOL) runs in its own tokio task.
Features are emitted every 100ms per symbol.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.TP
.B config/ing.toml
Ingestor settings (WebSocket URL, symbols, emission interval).
.TP
.B config/pipeline.toml
Pipeline orchestration (ingestion duration, analysis thresholds).
.TP
.B config/hypothesis_testing.toml
Hypothesis test parameters.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Log level (e.g., info, debug).
.TP
.B REDIS_URL
Redis connection URL.
.TP
.B ING_DASHBOARD_ENABLED
Enable/disable dashboard.
.TP
.B TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN\fR, \fBTELEGRAM_CHAT_ID
Telegram alert credentials.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I data/features/
Collected parquet data, organized by date.
.TP
.I reports/
Generated analysis reports and plots.
.TP
.I models/
Saved ML models.
.TP
.I logs/
Ingestor and pipeline logs.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start collecting data:
.PP
.nf
nat start
nat status
.fi
.PP
Run full analysis pipeline:
.PP
.nf
nat screen --symbol BTC
nat alpha combine --data data/features --top 10
nat alpha validate --data data/features
nat backtest --strategy scalping --symbol BTC
.fi
.PP
Check deployment readiness:
.PP
.nf
nat alpha deploy --check
.fi
.SH AUTHORS
yogt1984
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nat-help (1)
.PP
Full command reference: \fBnat help\fR
